#summary This document explains the architecture of the Cal3DJS library.

= Overview =

The basic concept in the Cal3D library is to separate data that can be shared between several objects from data that is tied to one specific object instance. In the realm of skeletal character animation there is quite a lot of shared data: Take the animations and the meshes as examples

The Cal3D library has a set of [Overview#Core Classes Core Classes] that represents one type of model and that stores all the shared data. Each set of _*Instance Classes*_ is constructed from the Core Classes and represents one specific instance of the model type

Say we have a little fantasy game with heroic warriors and deadly dragons. There will be 2 different core models, namely the one for the warriors and the other for the dragons. The core model of the warriors contains all the animations, materials and meshes of all possible warrior instances. The same holds for the dragon core model. Now, every time a warrior or dragon is born, a new model instance will be created based on its core model. The individual appearance is done by selecting specific meshes and materials from the core model. This allows us to have epic battles with numerous different warriors and dragons, even so we store most of the data only once.

== Core Classes ==

As explained, each set of _*Core Classes*_ contains all the data for one model type. This data can be divided into 4 parts: 

 # The hierarchical structure, see Skeletons and Bones for details. 
 # The motion data, see Animations, Tracks and Keyframes for details. 
 # The surface properties, see Materials for details. 
 # The body parts, see Meshes and Submeshes for details.